[THEME MUSIC]
>>GEORGE NOORY: Well,
welcome to "Beyond Belief."
And every once in a
while on "Beyond Belief,"
we dive deep into the
psychology of the human mind.
And with us today
is Jonathan Zap.
Jonathan is a
author, researcher,
paranormal investigator, and an
expert on Jungian philosophy.
Jonathan, welcome
to "Beyond Belief."
>>JONATHAN ZAP:
Thank you very much.
>>NOORY: You remind
me of an actor
who played in "Roger Rabbit."
He's not with us anymore.
Thank God you are.
But you look identical to him.
>>ZAP: Wow.
>>NOORY: I can't
remember the guy's name.
>>ZAP: I haven't seen
"Roger Rabbit" in so long,
but I'll definitely
check that out.
>>NOORY: Anyways, how are you?
And welcome to the program.
>>ZAP: I'm well.
I'm happy to be here.
>>NOORY: How did
you get involved
in studying Jungian philosophy?
And what is that, by the way?
>>ZAP: OK.
Well, it's kind of
an interesting story.
I mean, I had had my own
paranormal experiences
since I was a small child.
But then in my last
year of college
when I was just 20 years
old, I was given a chance
to study some of these
things that had haunted me
and to try and figure
out what was going on.
And it was my mom who was a
psychologist for 44 years who
said, well, you should
look into this guy, Carl
Jung, and his theory of
the collective unconscious
and archetypes.
So I go up to the
college library.
There are these impressive
collected works, the Princeton
Bollingen edition.
But I'm also kind of a bit
skeptical, because I'm like,
this guy reached manhood
in the 19th century.
He's the son of a
Protestant minister.
What's he going to have to say
about this weird Jewish kid
and my sci-fi obsessions?
And I thought-- but I'm
like, I'll give it a try.
I pull up the index volume.
And right away, I
see-- oh, he wrote
a book called "Flying Saucers
and the Modern Myth of Things
Seen in the Sky."
Well, that was a direct hit.
Because the stories that
I was obsessed with,
especially a movie called
"Village of the Damned--"
>>NOORY: Oh, yeah.
>>ZAP: --which is a
1960 black and white--
>>NOORY: It'll scare the
living daylights out of you.
>>ZAP: Exactly.
I mean, when I saw that it was--
because I'd seen many
great sci-fi movies.
But that one was like
a religious experience.
I knew it had some kind
of incredible, uncanny
significance.
And that was one of the
few that had that, but none
more than that.
And that involved
flying saucers.
So I pull out that book
from the collective works.
And I see like,
wow, he was working
on this right at
the end of his life.
I start flipping
through the book.
And I see he couldn't
let go of the subject.
Because after the book,
there's like an afterword.
Then after the afterword,
there's an epilogue.
And then after the
epilogue, there's a third
after thing, a supplement.
And I start thumbing
through the supplement.
And now, my jaw drops open,
because the supplement is
Jung analyzing a science
fiction novel by British author
John Wyndham called
the "Midwich Cuckoos."
Well, I already knew that
was the novel that the movie
"Village of the Damned--"
>>NOORY: Based on.
>>ZAP: --was based on.
>>NOORY: That's right.
>>ZAP: So in my first
encounter with Jung,
he might as well have been a
holographic wizard stepping out
of the bookcase and saying--
bearing a torch and saying,
I was interested in that one,
too, and here's what I thought.
His exact endpoint was
my exact start point.
And so I was then able to
use all the tools of Jungian
psychology to understand
the idea that there's
this collective unconscious.
There's a collective
field of consciousness
and how that works with our
present state of evolution.
>>NOORY: Jung worked a
lot with Sigmund Freud.
They were very
close at one point,
and then they broke apart.
What happened?
>>ZAP: Exactly.
Well, there were
many things that
caused them to break apart.
I mean, some people think that
Jung was a bright student.
This wasn't true at all.
Jung had a much
more prestigious,
scientific pedigree.
He was a professor at a
very serious university
and so forth.
>>NOORY: Or had a natural--
>>ZAP: Respectability.
And also, Freud as a Jew--
they were calling this
Jewish psychology.
And Jung was a
Protestant, and a Swiss,
and a very tall,
6 foot 5 or 6 guy.
So he gave a lot of credibility
to Freudian psychology.
But where they
started to break apart
was that Freud was only
willing to go one layer deep
into the personal unconscious.
And he was obsessed
with the sexual theory.
And he was afraid,
really, of other contents
of the unconscious that began
to come up in people's dreams
and even in some
of Jung's dreams.
And Jung eventually
couldn't take the repression
of this other content, or even
some paranormal experiences
that happened with
both of them together.
And other things where
sort of these other aspects
of the unconscious and
paranormal phenomena
were kind of exploding
into their relationship.
And Jung was ready to go
there, and Freud wasn't.
However, it should
be acknowledged
that Freud was a great pioneer
and did many great things
to break open exploration
of the unconscious.
>>NOORY: Jonathan,
there's a phrase
called Singularity Archetype.
What is that?
>>ZAP: OK.
Well, that is a term
that I invented.
I mean, this is what--
>>NOORY: This is yours?
>>ZAP: Yes.
And this is something that in
1978 when I was 20 and when--
after I discovered
Jung, then I discovered
that there was an
archetype that previously--
unrecognized that I have
since called the Singularity
Archetype.
And it relates to two
parallel event horizons.
One is eschaton, which
could be loosely defined
as a kind of endpoint
of the species,
the point that people will
project apocalypse onto,
but also, rapture, quantum
evolutionary shift.
It will be seen by the ego
as an apocalyptic event.
But it will be seen by what
Jung called the self, kind
of a totality of all
the psychic structures
as a transcendent event.
And so this was a key
discovery I made when I was 20.
And the other event
horizon that it relates to
is the personal event
horizon of death.
It's like with a
hologram or a fractal,
the small part
recapitulates the whole.
So the lifecycle of the
individual human being
is also kind of like a
hologram, or a fractal pattern
of the lifecycle of the species.
And when you look at some
of these science fiction
and futuristic
projections of what
may happen when we cross the
event horizon as a species,
like we see in the movie
and the book "2001,"
those things become
phenomenological actualities
and near-death experience.
Things like a
telepathic network,
a breakdown of the boundary
between self and other,
a transcendence of linear time,
transcending the physical body.
These things are all projected
in the modern mythology, which
takes the form of
especially science fiction.
And yet, they also
actually happen
when people have near-death
experiences and related
consciousness
transforming experiences.
Sometimes people experience this
in dreams with hallucinogens,
with out-of-body experience, and
sometimes just spontaneously.
But the most powerful are
with near-death experience.
>>NOORY: How consumed
are we, Jonathan,
with death and discussing
death in our lifetime?
>>ZAP: Well, it's an
interesting thing.
Because many people will do
anything not to discuss it,
or to think about it.
But we live in a time--
and I'd like to trace
with you a little bit
of the modern history of this,
where there is what our friend
Whitley Strieber calls the
afterlife revolution going on.
And it really begins in 1848.
I mean, obviously we've had--
every human culture has had
people that have been mediums,
or have communicated with people
on the other side or purported
to.
In aboriginal
cultures, that would
be a shaman whose
job might be largely
to commune with the ancestors.
But in 1848, there was--
two evolutionary changes
happened more or less
at the same time.
One was the birth of the
Spiritualist movement.
This was really the beginning
of the afterlife revolution.
And it began in a
particular time and place--
1848 in upstate New York
with the Fox sisters.
They were the first ones
to do the modern kind of--
or the classic kind of
seance with the table.
>>NOORY: What drove
them to do that?
>>ZAP: Well, I mean, that
is a history in itself.
And there's controversy.
Because one sister said
that some of what they did
was fraudulent.
And obviously, a lot
of it was always--
there has always been a history
of trickery mixed up with this
as well as real phenomena.
Another sister talked about
there was a real phenomenon.
And what drove them,
I think, is what
drives so many people to
look into this field who
want to know
answers, or have lost
loved ones with whom
they want to commune.
And we'll actually
see this converge
with the other change that
was happening at the same time
as the spiritualism
was being born.
It'll converge in the
Lincoln presidency,
which I'll get to in a minute.
So at the same time that
spiritualism was being born,
we saw a huge
evolutionary event happen
that is exploding right
around us right now.
And that is the birth of
electronic communication.
So what was going
on at the same time
was the birth of electronic
telegraphy, the telegraph.
And to give you an idea
how close this was in time,
in 1843 it came
before the Congress
to fund an experiment
in telegraphy.
And it was very controversial.
A lot of congressmen thought
it was magic, or it was a hoax.
Eventually, they had
a vote and it was--
they funded $30,000.
And it was 89 for, 80 against,
but with 70 congressmen
abstaining, because they
didn't even want their name
associated with it.
There were clergymen at the
time who called it black magic.
>>NOORY: What was it?
>>ZAP: And this
was the telegraph.
>>NOORY: Oh, that there's
a telegraph itself?
>>ZAP: Was black magic.
Right.
But by the time Lincoln
became president
not too long after, and by the
time that the Fox sisters got
going in 1848, almost
every major country
had a telegraph system.
So they're happening almost
exactly the same time.
Lincoln, "The New
York Times" called
our first wired president,
saw the potential
of electronic
communication, telegraphy.
And so he was a
tremendous innovator
with electronic communication.
In fact, the first situation
was really the telegraph office.
It was part of the
War building that
was next to the White House.
And Lincoln would spend a
lot of his time in there.
In fact, during
battles and so forth,
he would actually sleep
in the telegraph office.
>>NOORY: Waiting for messages?
>>ZAP: Waiting for
messages, reading ones that
were not even addressed to him.
And in his telegrams, he
really made great use of it.
Because most people
could only send
these short, little messages,
because you paid by the letter.
But of course, he didn't have--
>>NOORY: Whatever
he needed to do.
>>ZAP: Yeah, so he would send
telegrams to Ulysses S. Grant,
for example, that were poetic
that really like emotionally
tuned into what Grant was going
through and empathizing with
these--
>>NOORY: The Gettysburg
Address and things
like that all over again.
>>ZAP: Yeah.
But now, not only was he
our first wired president,
he was our
spiritualist president.
Because in 1861,
he was traumatized
by the death of probably
his famous favorite son
right when he was in office.
And he was devastated and
his wife Mary Todd Lincoln
was devastated.
>>NOORY: Oh, she was crushed.
>>ZAP: And so she
brought in spiritualists.
Now, the evidence about how
much Lincoln participated
is not solid, but of
course, he would not
have wanted it to be solid.
But she publicly embraced
the spiritualists
and definitely held
seances and so forth.
So here you see the birth
of both spiritualism
and of electronic communications
both happening together.
>>NOORY: And didn't he have a
dream, Jonathan, of there was
a casket in the White House?
>>ZAP: Right.
>>NOORY: And he went up to
a soldier and it was him?
>>ZAP: Exactly.
I mean, he had an
incredible-- and this
is very well documented.
This is solid.
He had an incredible,
prophetic dream about himself
and being able to know.
And I've had experiences
like that about a death
before it happens in this way.
So it specifically tells us
that death is not just quite
what the materialists
would have us believe.
And so with the
Lincoln presidency,
we find these two
themes converging.
And then it really continues
up until the present era.
And where there was a
great watershed moment
was in 1975, when
Raymond Moody published
his book "Life After Life."
And now, this brings the
field of near-death experience
into being.
The terms life review and so
forth all are coined in 1975.
And then also what's
happening in addition
to the explosion
that's continuing
of electronic communication--
I mean, people have pointed
out that a kid in Africa
today with a
smartphone-- and there
are a lot of kids in
Africa who have them.
It's not a luxury item anymore.
It's more like a
basic necessity--
has access to more information
than President Clinton
did in his first
term as president.
>>NOORY: That's amazing.
>>ZAP: And then another
technological trend
that's going on is the explosion
of resuscitation technology
that's happened since Raymond
Moody's book came out.
So now-- I mean, even just in
the last three or four years--
I mean, now they say that if
the Titanic disaster happened
today, they could send a
boat in a few hours later--
>>NOORY: Most of those people.
>>ZAP: --to restart them.
And these people--
some people say
it's a misnomer to call it
near death, because these
are people that meet every
clinical definition of death.
So never before in
human history have we
had so many people who've
had such profound experiences
of being dead and coming back.
But we've also never had so much
formal research in the field.
>>NOORY: It is truly remarkable.
>>ZAP: Some of it
published like Dr. Pim van
Lommel, the Dutch cardiologist.
I mean, his work is
published in the journal
"Lancet," a prestigious
medical journal.
>>NOORY: Well, you're
right, though, Jonathan.
Technology today is
really changing things.
>> Technology is transforming
us at an accelerating pace.
It was Walter Isaacson
that expressed in his book
"The Innovators" that he was
far less interested in making
machines more human and far
more interested in the symbiosis
between humans and machines.
This is the symbiosis that takes
place between our tools and us.
We are the tool-forging
species that
will continue to innovate
and extend beyond ourselves
and exceed our grasp.
This is exporting
our cognition the way
that we export our cognition
into our mobile phones.
The supercomputer that we
have in our pockets that will
now embody our
new state of mind.
This new state of mind is
also a new connected sphere
within this universe, changing
the neural pathways and neural
configurations in our brain at
the synaptic and axonal level.
Through dendrites
that are now starting
to form the new tree
trunks in our brains
and the self-similar
patterns that
are forging these new
technologies that we
have in our lives.
It's augmented
intelligence that's
going to be the wave
of the future, not
artificial intelligence.
Artificial intelligence
combined with our own humanity
is going to be the new aperture,
the new substrate in which we
can connect with one another.
This is going to enhance
who we are as individuals,
and we will transcend.
We will become transhuman
as Jason Silva says.
And it was Ray
Kurzweil that said
with the embodiment of our
imagination and the way
that we can model our minds
within our own imagination,
that combined with the
creativity that we have
and also our modest
opposable thumbs are we
the tool-forging species.
With that, we will continue
to innovate our lives
and create new tools,
until the entire universe
is at our fingertips.
>>NOORY: Do you agree
with that, Jonathan,
that the entire universe
could be at our fingertips?
>>ZAP: Well, I think in
some ways it already is.
I mean, our reach is just
expanding exponentially.
And so we see-- and it
shouldn't be surprising
that organic evolution and
technological evolution
parallel and synergize.
They're symbiotic.
One enhances the other.
And so for example, we
saw somebody looking
into virtual reality goggles.
I mean, I believe based
on the technologists
that I've spoken to that we
could right now, with just
off-the-shelf hardware,
create out-of-body experiences
on demand for a lot of people.
>>NOORY: Right.
I think you're right.
Give them an opportunity
to feel it and see it.
>>ZAP: Because they
can displace you
from your proprioceptive
sense of where your body is.
And I think in a lot of
people that would trigger
an out-of-body experience.
And so now, if we have enough
of the population aware as I
am-- and many others have
had spontaneous out-of-body
experiences-- that your
consciousness is not
reducible to your meat body.
It is not completely
in your body.
And if enough people
realize that--
because an out-of-body
experience--
if you look at what Robert
Monroe and other great
out-of-body explorers
have done, I mean,
this can be as profound or
more profound than a near-death
experience--
>>NOORY: For sure.
>>ZAP: --in creating
a contact with what's
happening on the other side
of that great event horizon.
So if you look at this
from a point of view
of biological evolution
where evolution advances,
there's always an
advance in communication,
the flow of information,
and awareness.
So for example,
evolutionary biologists
will say that marsupials
like kangaroos,
for example, are limited in
their evolutionary potential,
because of their
brain structure.
They lack the corpus callosum,
that dense bundle of nerves
that we have and that most--
that mammals have that
allows communication
between the left and
right hemispheres.
>>NOORY: Of your brain?
>>ZAP: Right Similarly, 544
million years ago, we only
had three phyla of animal life.
But then by 538
million years ago,
just six million
years later, which
wasn't much considering the
scale of time at that point,
we had 38 phyla of animal life,
the same number we have today.
Well, what happened during
those six million years--
and this is a theory called
the Light Switch Theory put out
by Andrew Parker
who is an Oxford
zoologist and some others--
is that's when we evolved eyes.
Because once the
animals had eyes,
the flow of information and
an awareness exponentiated.
Now, you could have predators,
and prey, and so forth.
So everywhere we see this
improved flow of information.
And more recently, when
language is invented,
we become the dominant animal,
because of our superior ability
to process language.
Then when we developed
written alphabets,
that was a big milestone.
But it may also have triggered
many of the dark things
that we notice in human history.
I mean, that's what seems to
have triggered the dominator
age.
There's a book about this
called "The Alphabet Versus
the Goddess.
Now, this is being
greatly transformed.
I mean, basically the theory
is that once written alphabets
were introduced, it
caused a imbalance
to favor the left hemisphere.
That's the hemisphere that would
work with alphabets or numbers.
It's the one that's into linear
thinking and into hierarchy.
And that's when we start to
have patriarchal societies,
which are run by a
document, which could be
"Hammurabi's Code," the
Bible, the "DSM-IV."
It could be the US
Constitution, the rule of law.
And those societies tend
to be sort of anti-female
and violent.
But right now, the explosion
of visual technologies
are making people
more bihemispheric.
And as bad as newspaper
headlines might seem,
we live in the least violent
time in human history
or pre-history right now.
The lowest.
As bad as what's
going on in Syria is,
we have the lowest per
capita war death rate
now that we've ever had.
>>NOORY: Why is that?
>>ZAP: Well, I mean, no
one can say for sure.
But I wonder if it
isn't because we're
becoming more bihemispheric.
And so the visual media--
even if it's a first-person
shooter video game,
regardless of the
objectionable content
is making people more
holistic in their thinking,
more feminine in their
values, and is overall,
with certain notable
exceptions, making
people more tolerant
and more accepting
of diversity and other things.
For example, Leonard
Shlain points out
that the whole modern rise
in the rights of women
pretty much tracks perfectly
with the rise of television.
>>NOORY: Really?
>>ZAP: Yeah.
>>NOORY: That's interesting.
>>ZAP: And this
explosion of visual media
is affecting us in
many profound ways.
We're becoming more visual.
And what these projections of
the future of the species--
suggest visual telepathies and
a visual telepathic network.
And that is also what
people experience
in their near-death experiences.
They will have a
telepathic life review,
where they are aware of
what other people were
thinking and feeling who
were in the room with them.
>>NOORY: They actually
feel this, too.
>>ZAP: Right.
And their sense of vision
will be greatly enhanced.
Somebody may have a severe
astigmatism or something.
But they may have not
just panoramic vision,
but sometimes spherical vision.
And people who were
congenitally blind since birth--
Dr. Kenneth Ring wrote
about this with a co-author
in the book "Mindsight."
They may have completely
visually comprehended
near-death experiences.
And they've never
experienced vision before.
And they may come
back and report, oh,
now I know what
grandma looks like
and be able to provide
veridical, visual information
based on this
near-death experience.
>>NOORY: Well, you talk
about near-death experiences.
Dr. Eben Alexander who wrote
the book "Proof of Heaven"
was a guest of mine,
Jonathan, on "Beyond Belief."
When you went to the other
side, what was it like?
Describe it for us.
>>EBEN ALEXANDER: Well, it all
started in a very primitive,
course, unresponsive realm
that I call the earthworm's eye
view.
A very, very dark and murky
kind of course reality,
like being in dirty Jell-O.
>>NOORY: It sounds like hell.
>>EBEN ALEXANDER: Well, people
often ask me when I got--
>>NOORY: You think
you would go there?
>>EBEN ALEXANDER: No.
Well-- but it is part
of the spiritual realms.
And it's something we
have no need to fear.
But that fearlessness
is a crucial part
of the lesson of my journey.
Turns out that
from that realm, I
was rescued by a slowly
spinning white light, very clear
that came bundled with a
perfect musical melody.
And that white light
opened up like a rip
in the fabric of that ugly
earthworm eye view realm
and led up into an all
too real valley, what
I call the Gateway
Valley, that was filled
with many earth-like features.
For example, there was
lots of plant life-- lush,
growing, flowers
blossoming, buds on trees.
No sign of any death or decay.
Beautiful waterfalls
into sparkling pools.
Thousands of beings dancing
below, tremendous joy
and merriment.
I saw them all as
souls between lives.
And I was witnessing it
all as a speck of awareness
on a butterfly wing.
There were millions
of other butterflies.
>>NOORY: By the side looking in?
>>EBEN ALEXANDER: Looking
down on this valley.
And again, the
thing to stress, it
was absolutely-- it was far
more real than this world.
This world is the dream.
This is the murky
kind of surreality.
That is the shocking reality
of our spiritual realm.
And it was all very much fueled.
Because up above in the sky
over this beautiful valley
were these hooping
orbs of light,
golden orbs leaving
sparkling trails
of golden dust against the
blue-black velvety sky.
And these orbs were emanating
chants, and anthems, hymns.
It would thunder through me.
This incredible
astonishing power
and majesty of the
unconditional love
of the deity of
that realm, that God
that drove every
bit of that journey.
And of course, there was a
beautiful girl on the butterfly
wing who later proved
crucial in showing me
the reality of the journey.
Many months after my coma,
it was identifying her
that helped me to
understand it all.
But that was only a stepping
stone to higher levels.
And in fact, those angelic
choirs, the music from them
provided yet another portal
music vibration frequency--
are the way that our souls
transcend these realms.
And that particular
portal out of the valley
led into pure oneness and
what I call the core realm--
infinite, inky
blackness, but filled
to overflowing with
the healing power
of that divine loving creative
source, that God or deity.
In fact, I came back
calling that deity Om,
because that was the sound
that I heard in that realm.
But it was just an
extraordinary spiritual journey.
And the most amazing
thing, of course,
is that it happened when my
brain was demonstrably offline,
when the neocortex was
known by my neurologic exams
and by my scans.
My doctors knew that
I could not have had
any kind of robust experience.
Because this was far
more real than anything
I've ever experienced
in my existence.
>>NOORY: Quite a guy, Jonathan.
But how do we know
that experience
that he felt was real was real?
>>ZAP: Well, first of all, as
he pointed out near the end--
I mean, first of all, from the
phenomenological point of view,
it's real.
And that he experienced
it and came back
with a very vivid memory of it.
Now, from the point of view
of neurological materialism,
you have no ability
to explain this.
So that neurological
materialism--
these are the people.
And this is--
>>NOORY: There's nothing
to compare it to.
>>ZAP: Well, these
are the people.
I mean, in most of the academic
world and most of science,
they just assume that if they
admit consciousness exists
at all-- many of them don't--
that it's just an epiphenomenon.
It's a secondary effect,
a biochemical process
in the brain.
But now, here's a guy.
And I think he had meningitis
or some serious brain illness.
>>NOORY: He went into a coma.
>>ZAP: Right.
I mean, there are people
who have done no--
have not done their
homework on that.
Well, it's just an
oxygen deprived brain.
Well, an oxygen
deprived brain doesn't
store these extremely
complex memories and not just
like an ordinary memory
of going to the store,
but of seeing things
you've never seen before.
I mean, think of
the processing power
if that were a movie to
make all that up on the fly.
The processing power that
would take of a brain.
And yet, this is a brain
that is in the worst
shape it's ever been in.
Or if you consider like
the Pam Reynolds case
when she has no
blood in her brain.
She's completely flatlined.
There's no measurable
electrical activity there.
But she's able not just to
have her own complex inner
experience like this,
but also to bring back
veridical information
like things
that were said in
the surgery room
and what the Midas Rex
bone saw looked like,
which is not what
she expected at all,
or what an average
person would expect.
And her eyes were taped shut.
>>NOORY: How do
you explain that?
>>ZAP: Well, the
way I would explain
it is that consciousness is
not located in the brain.
It does not need a body.
>>NOORY: Is it in the heart?
>>ZAP: Well, I think
it's in something
like a non-local quantum field.
And so therefore,
this should take away
a lot of fear of death.
Because the death
of the body does not
threaten that consciousness.
Because it's not in the body.
It's associated with the body.
And obviously, the
condition of the body
when it's tightly
associated with it, as
in our normal waking state,
the condition-- the body
will play a big part.
But when it's separated
from the body,
like in an
out-of-body experience
or in these profound
near-death experiences,
consciousness can be
incredibly enhanced.
And he's describing many
of the classic things
that people experience
where it's more real.
They see colors they
haven't seen before.
They feel like
they've come home.
They feel like they are
at their actual baseline.
And these experiences
have a high degree
of thematic consistency,
one among others.
And these can
happen to children.
They happen to people
in other cultures.
We can find evidence of
them in the distant past.
And they are reflections.
They are individual reflections
of this singularity archetype
which explains, by the way,
how these experiences--
and this has been shown in
prospective studies that
were published in
the journal "Lancet."
The effect of the
near-death experience
will increase over time.
A single hallucination
or a shocking event--
the effect would
diminish over time.
>>NOORY: How do
we know, Jonathan,
that these things that are
happening to us are, one, real?
And you've done a
pretty good job trying
to explain that in some cases.
But what do we do
with this information?
How do we apply it
to our lifestyle?
>>ZAP: OK.
Well, good question.
So on the subject
of reality, I mean,
there are a number of
different directions we can go.
For one, we have to look at
the subjective quality of what
we consider real in
the waking world.
I'm looking at you right now.
But literally what's
happening is studio lights
are bouncing off of the
topography of your hair, skin,
clothing.
That falls on the
back of my retina
upside down, because
the cornea of my eye
is a simple convex lens.
There's also a
hole in the middle
of that retina, like
the digital sensor,
almost, where there's
no photoreceptors.
Because that's where the
bundle of nerves goes
back into the brain.
The brain just fills that
in with what it thinks
would be in that space.
And then it turns that
image right side up.
So when I'm looking at
you, it looks so solid.
But actually, it's a
neurological reconstruction
of a past event.
>>NOORY: I'm actually
a hologram, anyway.
>>ZAP: Well, I mean, that
makes it even more subjective.
>>NOORY: Technology.
>>ZAP: But you see,
what I'm saying
is what we normally experience
is far more dreamlike.
And philosophers
and neurologists
all acknowledge this.
And so when we have
an inner experience,
it's really no
less real than what
we're experiencing out here.
Because this is also an
inner created experience.
We don't see all the wavelengths
of light and so forth.
And it's also a fact
as Jung pointed out.
If I tell you to think of
a pink elephant and you do,
well, that may
seem like a nothing
that you thought of that.
But it's a fact that you had
pictured that particular thing
at that particular moment.
So it's a fact and a
highly structured fact
that he had this complex
inner experience.
Different people may want to
interpret it different ways.
>>NOORY: If I were
born blind, I wouldn't
have that same experience
that you asked me to,
because I'd have nothing
as a reference point.
I wouldn't know what
a pink elephant was.
>>ZAP: Exactly.
However, if you were having
a near-death experience
and you were blind, then
you might for the first time
have a visual experience.
>>NOORY: You might.
>>ZAP: Right.
And we can't explain that from
materialist brain science.
Because here's a person whose
brain is in the worse shape
it's ever been in.
And now for the
first time, they're
going to have a visually
comprehended experience
and have a complex memory of it.
>>NOORY: I have people and they
call "Coast to Coast," my radio
show.
Some of them have
been born blind,
so they never had an
opportunity to see anything.
And I'll talk to them on the
air about color, for example.
And I'll say, in your
mind, what is red?
And they have no basis for that.
So I tried it in, what is blue?
They have no basis.
So I'll try to say
the sky is blue.
That's the color of the sky.
But they don't have
the reference point
to see what that blue is.
They don't know what color is.
Everything is black.
>>ZAP: Right.
It's difficult to be
able to put ourselves
in the mind of another
and to find out
what that experience
is for another person.
But the last part
of your question,
though, about, what should
we do with these experiences?
>>NOORY: What do we do with it?
>>ZAP: OK.
Well, one thing is--
and I've actually
written about this in my book
"Crossing the Event Horizon."
There's a section.
>>NOORY: Great
title, by the way.
>>ZAP: Well, thank you.
>>NOORY: I love it.
>>ZAP: There's a
section that's called--
well, maybe I called this
on the website version
of this chapter--
"Life Lessons from
the Living Dead,"
where people come back from
near-death experiences.
And there is high
thematic consistency
in how their lives
change and what
they say about how to live
your life differently,
like the question you asked.
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
>>ZAP: Exactly.
What they all say is that
this is like a school.
We're here to learn
and to develop
in a very difficult plane
of reality to incarnate in.
We are here to develop
ourselves to become more
conscious to grow ourselves.
And the other great purpose
is to help other people,
especially with that,
but with anything.
And so there are
ways in which we
can live our lives differently.
And one way-- and this is part
of "The Afterlife Revolution,"
is to communicate more
and learn more about
what's going on, on the other
side of that event horizon.
So think about it
this way, George.
If an alien were to say, show
me a picture of a human being
and we show him a
picture of me at my age,
or we show him a picture
of a baby or something,
it's kind of misinforming,
because there's
a human lifecycle.
You don't always look like
you're 50, or 20, or whatever.
Now, once I saw some
kind of Hindu painting
that showed what would
be a better picture
to show an alien.
It shows a fetus connected
to a baby, connected
to a child,
adolescent, grown man--
>>NOORY: It shows the
stage of growth, right?
>>ZAP: --old man, corpse,
skeleton, and so forth.
And now, you're sort of seeing
a more complete lifecycle.
However, this is
still showing us only
between conception and death.
And we have much evidence
and reports in every culture
that that's not the
complete lifecycle.
So just like certain
animals like marsupials
are limited in their
evolution because their two
hemispheres can't communicate,
we may be limited as a species.
Because we can't
communicate most of the time
with the 80 billion or so,
depending on who you believe,
human beings who have
passed that event horizon.
However, we are living
in the golden age
of such communication, and
exploration, and research.
Now, of course, there
are plenty of charlatans.
There's plenty of nonsensical
or exploitative attempts
to communicate or purport to
communicate with the deceased.
But we have never
had so many people
bring back so much testimony
you have been clinically dead.
And so one way to live
our lives differently
is to increase the
flow of information
across this other
great hemisphere.
And that's why the shows
that you do are so important.
Because they are helping
people with the tools
and hearing the testimony of
people who've had those kind
of experiences.
>>NOORY: How many people
take that knowledge
and apply it to their life?
They should, but how many
people actually use it?
>>ZAP: Well, it's a
minority of persons.
But the esoteric work and
the work on consciousness
has always been
a minority thing,
but it's a substantial minority.
And a lot of people have
experiences like when
they've done Gallup polls.
Something like 85%
of Americans will
say that they have had
something that they
consider an experience of
contact with a departed
loved one.
However, they live--
>>NOORY: Which is huge.
>>ZAP: --in a culture where
people don't follow up on that,
or give them tools to increase
the communication and so forth.
And where people have
had exceptionally good
communication--
they have brought back
exceptionally good information.
I mean, you've recently
interviewed our friend Whitley
Strieber with his
continuing relationship
with his wife, Anne.
But an even more extraordinary
case of communication
came sort of at the tail end
of the Spiritualist movement
in the 1930s and '40s with a
guy named Stewart Edward White.
This was a guy who was a friend
of Teddy Roosevelt-- very
successful-- didn't need
to get into any of this.
He was a successful writer of
adventure stories and so forth.
But he and his wife,
Betty, were both very
rigorous paranormal researchers.
And Betty, before she
died, was a medium
and had contact with
spirits on the other side
she called the Invisibles.
Well, after she passed,
she almost immediately
was able to speak
through a medium that
was known to both of them when
they were both alive named
Joan, but was able
to provide volumes
of veridical information,
telling Stewart things that are
only known to the two of them.
And in some cases,
telling things
that were not known to
anybody present in the room.
>>NOORY: How would
they know, right?
>>ZAP: Right, exactly.
And whole books were written.
And the most powerful-- you
read most of them free online.
The most powerful, I think,
is called "The Unobstructed
Universe," where
these Invisibles--
a whole literal college of them
explains how time is different
when you're over
there as compared
to here, how the physics
of the other side
differs compared to here.
And it's highly consistent
with a lot of other reports.
>>NOORY: And
speaking of mediums,
James Van Praagh, appearing
on a Gaia television
program with Lisa Garr.
>>ZAP: OK.
>>LISA GARR: If we've
lost a loved one,
could we then communicate
to our loved ones
through those memories?
>>JAMES VAN PRAAGH: Yes, we can.
There is easy ways to
communicate with spirit.
People think you need
a medium to do it.
Not necessarily.
Now, a medium is someone
who is able to hear them
clearly and really be able to
translate what they're saying--
translate the images,
the impressions.
But everybody can hear
from their loved ones.
For instance, when you
go to sleep at night,
ask they come to your dreams.
That's the number one
way to communicate.
It's the dream state, so
come through your dreams.
You'll have a dream of them.
Or keep a journal
next to your bed
and try meditating, quieting
the mind, and listen to them.
And they'll start
writing a message to you.
>>LISA GARR: Why would they
come through our dreams?
>>JAMES VAN PRAAGH:
It's the easiest way
to get through,
because we're not
on our rational, conscious mind.
We're not in the critical mind.
That little mind chatter says,
oh, this can't possibly be.
That left brain-- the left part
of just analyzing everything,
critiquing everything.
We're not in that space,
pretty much away from that,
so it's easy to
drop something in.
>>LISA GARR: And
we're not in a place
of being able to move either,
so our minds are pretty clear.
I mean, one of the
wonderful reasons that I'd
love to have you on the
show-- and your here--
is so that people who are
in that space of grief
can get some
communication and maybe
try some things on their own.
That's why I love what you do.
Because-- I mean,
people try this
in the privacy of their own
home in their quietest hours.
I heard this person talk
and maybe this works.
And let me just try this.
>>JAMES VAN PRAAGH: But they
have to be consistent about it.
They can't be just--
OK, I'm going to
do this tonight,
and I'm going to have
results right away.
No, no, no.
It's really a process.
And it's a process, if you
will, training the mind also
to be open.
Because a lot of
us have a tough--
a lot of trouble
quieting the minds.
We have to train the
mind to quiet down.
The more you do it, the
better you get at it.
>>NOORY: Do you think,
Jonathan, we can communicate
with the other side?
>>ZAP: Absolutely.
I mean, I have my
own experiences,
which I don't talk about much.
They're not as veridical as some
of the best documented cases.
But James is right.
There are things you can
definitely do that will greatly
improve the possibility.
Now, first of all, in many
times the communication
happens without
people doing anything.
People will have--
>>NOORY: When they
least expect it.
>>ZAP: Right, exactly.
Often it's when
they're driving a car.
And that may be because they're
in a relaxed, trance-like
state.
And it's often
soon after someone
they were very close to passes.
And they will feel
this presence,
or they will hear about, I'm OK.
>>NOORY: Or they hear a
song on the radio that was
that person's favorite song.
>>ZAP: Or smell a perfume that's
not present in the environment,
but that belonged to
the deceased grandmother
and so forth.
So there are many
different ways.
And often it will just
happen very vividly,
very spontaneously, completely
unexpectedly, but often only
in a single instance.
Now, where it gets more
interesting is where--
as I've experienced-- been
experiencing in my life
and with Stewart Edward White
where there's ongoing contact.
And so some of
the things you can
do-- so it's like
I've been working
with dreams for decades.
And people say, well, how come
I can't remember my dreams?
Well, wake up in a dark room.
The sense impressions
will just wipe out
the memory of the dream,
because they're so powerful.
So if we are in a
distracting environment,
then we're not going
to be able to tune
in to subtle telepathies.
Because out of a
survival instinct,
we're going to be processing
the 3D worlds coming at us
and this kind of thing.
But if you're in a quiet
room in a meditative state--
I like pre-dawn.
I get up pre-dawn almost
every day to write.
That is the zone.
>>NOORY: That's the
creative zone for you?
>>ZAP: Yeah.
And it's also like the
witching hour of 3:00 o'clock
in the morning and so forth.
The window between
the worlds seems
to be much more
open at that time.
Most people in the community
are in the dreamtime.
So you have less
mundane consciousness
going on around you.
>>NOORY: I'm just getting
home from the radio show
right about then.
So while you're
writing, I'm driving.
>>ZAP: Right.
But you're also
speaking to people
and speaking about
this phenomenon
during some of that window kind
of zone, that nighthawk zone.
And so when you--
showing up-- in a lot of things
in life, it's about showing up.
So if you show up in that zone
where you could hear things,
and then when you start
to get a little bit better
at recognizing and
being able to work
with telepathic
communication, part of it
is being able to
tolerate ambiguity.
Because the average
person will want to like,
OK, give me some evidence.
And they want to erase all--
>>NOORY: They want
that evidence.
>>ZAP: --the ambiguity.
And no matter how
much of it you get,
you always want more, as
what Strieber points out
in his recent book.
As soon as he gets one
sign, he wants another one.
Because the barrier
to this is that we're
living in the physical 3D
world most of the time.
And so therefore, our
senses are confronting us
with so much reality
that is not in accord
with the presence of the other.
But writing things
down when you do
get messages,
recording that helps
to make it far more definite.
And so there are many
different techniques.
And some may be introduced
by new technologies.
Virtual reality
is probably going
to be a tremendous
catalyst for this.
>>NOORY: And it gets better,
and better, and better.
>>ZAP: Right.
It's in its infancy right now.
>>NOORY: You have
seen the movie "2001--
A Space Odyssey."
And you have some
tie-ins with that.
Tell me.
>>ZAP: Right.
Well, depending on how
deep you want to go,
we can go through the plot of
the whole movie if you want.
Because it has
tie-ins to everything
that we've talked about.
>>NOORY: What did Kubrick know?
>>ZAP: Well, it was the
collaboration of these two
great geniuses, Arthur C.
Clarke and Stanley Kubrick,
both of them famous atheists.
But in this story, we
find all of these themes
coming together.
And there'll be
some plot spoilers,
but most people have probably
already really seen the movie.
But we start out and
with a kind of tombstone.
So the connection to
death is always there.
We see this black monolith
sticking out of the ground
the like a tombstone.
>>NOORY: That's right,
the monolith, right?
>>ZAP: Right, exactly.
The monolith.
And our friend, Jay
Weidner, of course,
has written extensively
about this, too.
And we see some missing link
hominids dancing around this--
what's an
extraterrestrial artifact
that's been sent to rewire
their brains somehow.
And after they've been
exposed to this object,
they've now been
enhanced as compared
to the other missing link
hominids in the neighborhood.
>>NOORY: Almost
human-like, right?
>>ZAP: Well, they're
almost human like,
but they don't have language.
They don't seem
to have tool use.
But now, suddenly after
this event occurs,
now they discover tool use.
You see one of them picking up a
large bone and using it to club
these pig-like animals.
And they discover tools.
And then they are attacked by
a identical-looking hominid
tribe.
And the alpha of that
tribe comes forward
to fight the alpha
of the tribe that's
been exposed to the monolith.
And the alpha of
the enhanced tribe
picks up one of these bone clubs
and bludgeons the other one
to death.
So then they have an
evolutionary advantage.
>>NOORY: Our Gaia show
"Hollywood Decoded"
talks a little bit about that.
>>ZAP: Oh, really?
>> That process, though, is
aimed at trying to transcend
these limitations, that
initiatory process.
And this is what's going to
happen to Bowman when Bowman
enters into the Stargate.
He's going to see this dazzling,
psychedelic light show that's
kind of the fabric or
structure of reality.
And he's going to see these
sort of platonic forms, right?
Pythagorean forms.
And so we want to
look at that clip
of him entering the Stargate.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> So while I understand
that this is far prior
to the "Matrix," I read this
as the universe itself being
constructed in a
kind of platonic way.
That there's this kind of
three-dimensional cubic reality
that we've been talking
about that limits us.
And here is Bowman
moving out of that.
And you can go all the way
back to Plato's "Dialogues"
like the "Timaeus," which
is his creation account.
And I don't know
how he knew this,
or Socrates knew
this, or whoever.
But somehow, way
before microscopes,
they posited the theory that
the lowest levels of reality
are actually formal,
that they have form.
So you can look at it
like a benzene ring.
It has that hexagonal
structure to it, right?
So how they knew
that, I don't know.
But I think there's always
been this sort of sense maybe
contained within
comparative religion,
or religious traditions,
or Hermetic traditions.
The reality, really,
is this structure.
It really does have
this architecture.
It's a fabric of
light in a way, much
like what we see
in the "Matrix,"
and that it can be transcended.
There are other
planes of existence.
>>NOORY: I think those
lights would drive me crazy,
Jonathan, if I saw those
coming at me like that.
>>ZAP: Well, I mean, he's in
a state of ontological shock.
You see him there.
And his mind is
completely blown.
But let's go back a little
bit further in the movie.
After these-- back
to the missing links.
The alpha kills the other
alpha, throws the bone club up
in the air.
And in a gesture of triumph--
>>NOORY: Slow
motion we see that.
>>ZAP: --we follow the bone.
And then in a 30
second of a second--
that's the frame
rate of the film--
100,000 years or something
of evolution are spliced out.
And now, we see a bone white
spacecraft orbiting the earth.
And an interesting fact
is that actually it
was Kubrick and
Clarke's intention
that that be an orbiting
nuclear weapons platform.
They chose not to emphasize
it, because remember
what Kubrick's previous
film was "Dr. Strangelove."
It would be-- two
nuclear doomsday
things in a row would be
too much, so they died out.
>>NOORY: He died during
"Eyes Wide Shut," didn't he?
>>ZAP: Yes, he did.
>>NOORY: I believe.
>>ZAP: What a loss
of great genius.
So then we have another
monolith appears.
But this time this one has
been buried on the moon.
It's been set up so that when
we were technologically evolved
enough where we could map
the moon's magnetic field,
we discover a magnetic
anomaly-- dig this one up.
As soon as we dig it up-- and
they're kind of taking selfies
in front of it-- the
astronauts and so forth--
it sends out a
powerful radio signal
to lapetus, a moon of Jupiter.
They actually wanted
to do it-- have
it be a moon of Saturn,
which archetypally would
have been more appropriate.
But the state of the
art special effects--
Douglas Trumbull's
industrial-like magic
didn't think they could pull
off the rings of Saturn.
So it becomes a ring of Jupiter.
>>NOORY: They could now.
>>ZAP: They could now.
Absolutely.
Imagine if they did a remake of
that now if Kubrick was alive.
Oh, my God.
So they send down a spacecraft
called the Discovery One
to go to that moon.
And the Discovery One-- if
you see a picture of it,
it looks like a
human sperm cell.
So it has this
evolutionary aspect--
a single sperm cell
going out through space.
And now, we have a war
between two competing streams
of evolution that we
are undergoing right now
and people are concerned about.
And that is AI versus us.
>>NOORY: And who wins?
>>ZAP: Well, we do,
but very narrowly.
It comes down-- most of the
astronauts on board Discovery
One are killed by the
HAL 9000 computer.
And it becomes a 0-1 survival
game between the last surviving
astronaut Bowman--
>>NOORY: Dave?
>>ZAP: Dave Bowman and HAL.
And Bowman wins.
And now, when he is approaching
as the last surviving entity--
is approaching Iapetus.
It looks like a giant eye.
There's a lot of connection
here with eyes and with vision.
And the pupil of
that eye is actually
an enormous black monolith.
And then when he lands
on it, it's like this--
it's actually called a Stargate.
It's the first time we
hear that phrase Stargate.
When he enters it, he enters
this interdimensional corridor
where his mind is blown, as
we saw in that film clip.
And now, we see an incredible
and uncanny intersection
with near-death
experience research.
But remember the timeline.
Both the novel and the movie--
created 1968 simultaneously.
>>NOORY: Long time ago.
>>ZAP: OK, seven years before
the publication of Raymond
Moody's "Life After Life."
And yet, what we see
is the light tunnel.
And in my book, I give examples
of near-death experiences,
talking about what the
light tunnel is like.
And I place that alongside
the description in the novel.
And you almost can't
tell them apart,
except that Arthur C. Clarke
is a better writer than most
near-death experiencers.
And then he goes
through a life review.
Now, remember, the
term life review
had not been coined till 1975.
Here we have two atheist
geniuses, Kubrick and Clarke.
>>NOORY: Way ahead
of their time.
>>ZAP: Yeah.
And we have a sci-fi
futuristic thing,
but it has incredible parallels
to near-death experience.
But that supports my idea
of a Singularity Archetype
that relates to both of
those event horizons.
And then we have--
even more like a
near-death experience,
we have these
out-of-body experiences.
He shows up into
this virtual reality
kind of hotel room
with a lighted floor
and like the Louis
Katsoris furniture.
And he starts to hear a sound.
And he sees an older
man who looks like him,
but as an older
man eating dinner.
And now, he becomes
that older man.
And now, the older man is
there and hears another sound.
And he looks over to the
right and sees a bedroom.
And in there is an
extremely, profoundly old man
on his deathbed.
So here, again, we have
the connection to death.
And now, on the
deathbed, then, we
become the point of view
of that extremely aged man.
And now, on the deathbed,
just like a tombstone,
is a black monolith.
It is both the Stargate
and the tombstone.
It is an evolutionary event
horizon, but it's the end of--
>>NOORY: The
beginning and the end.
>>ZAP: --life-- of death.
Exactly.
And once he passes
through that, that's
when he becomes the Star
Child, a luminous being
in an orb of light.
Think of how much talk there's
been about the force of life.
>>NOORY: The fetus
sucking its thumb, right?
>>ZAP: Right.
And becomes-- and out with huge
eyes, almost like a gray alien.
And he is now the
new evolutionary form
having passed through
both death and
a interdimensional Stargate.
>>NOORY: Something-- a journey
we are all going to take.
>>ZAP: Exactly.
And we should have
every reason to be
excited about that
journey, especially
if we live our lives well.
Because we have
such solid evidence
that consciousness does not
require a living human body,
and that we will be enhanced.
Those of us who have led
lives that we're not just
disintegrated completely
while we're alive spiritually,
it seems, will be enhanced
by that experience.
Just like when you have
an out-of-body experience.
I mean, I had a terrible fear
of death when I was a child.
But then after a few spontaneous
out-of-body experiences,
I realized I'm so much more.
>>NOORY: You're not
afraid of dying?
>>ZAP: No.
>>NOORY: Not at all.
>>ZAP: I'm afraid of the stuff
that could lead up to it.
I'm intimidated by
aging, and illness,
and all that kind of stuff.
>>NOORY: He's sick and
infirm and stuff like that.
>>ZAP: Exactly.
But I'm excited about
death as the great portal.
>>NOORY: And as we wrap this
up, Jonathan, one last question.
And that is, when we
all get to this point--
and we will-- if
we're in our deathbed,
or wherever we may
be, what should we
be thinking about moments
before we stop breathing?
>>ZAP: Well, thinking about
where we want to go next.
I think the time
to think about it--
I tell this to people all
the time is when they're
making a big decision,
ask yourself,
will you remember this
well on your deathbed?
You want to be--
many people who even haven't
lived such good lives
show great signs of
peacefulness and awareness
of other departed people
on their deathbeds.
We also have people who were
in a state of profound dementia
with profound brain damage who
haven't been lucid in years
become completely lucid,
according to hospice workers,
minutes before they die, which
is inexplainable medically.
Because their brain should
be in the worst shape ever.
But they'll become
completely lucid.
So we can set an
intention, but things
may happen spontaneously.
So even if you're a
technological person like Steve
Jobs, his last words were--
>>NOORY: Oh, wow.
>>ZAP: Oh, wow.
>>NOORY: What did he see?
>>ZAP: What to think of may
come to us from the other side.
We may already be
in a place where
we are being guided, because
so many people report contact
with others in the hours
or days before they die.
And so we may be helped in
knowing what to think about
in those final moments.
>>NOORY: How do people
find you, Jonathan?
>>ZAP: My website
is zaporacle.com.
>>NOORY: Z-A-P?
>>ZAP: O-R-A-C-L-E.com.
And they can find my book on
Amazon and the usual places.
I also write for
an online magazine
called "Reality Sandwich."
You find 140 articles I've
written on various topics.
>>NOORY: Come on back
again, would you?
>>ZAP: Thank you, I'd love to.
>>NOORY: Jonathan, thanks
for being on "Beyond Belief."
>>ZAP: Thank you very much.
>>NOORY: So you've heard it.
When the lights go
out, close your eyes.
And the lights will come back
on again until the end of time.
I'm George Noory and thanks
for watching "Beyond Belief."
[THEME MUSIC]